.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Guillem Jover <guillem@hadrons.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" .
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
.\" EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
.\" PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS;
.\" OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
.\" ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 03, 2022
.Dt getprogname 3bsd
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm getprogname ,
.Nm setprogname
.Nd get and set program name
.Sh LIBRARY
.ds str-Lb-libbsd Utility functions from BSD systems (libbsd, \-lbsd)
.ds doc-str-Lb-libbsd \*[str-Lb-libbsd]
.Lb libbsd
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In stdlib.h
(See
.Xr libbsd 7
for include usage.)
.Ft const char *
.Fn getprogname "void"
.Ft void
.Fn setprogname "const char *progname"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getprogname
returns a string with the current program name,
excluding any directory component.
The function will return
.Dv NULL
if it was unable to get the program name from any known source.
.Pp
The
.Fn setprogname
function sets the current program name,
stripping any directory component prefix.
The function will keep a reference to the passed string pointer,
so it must not be freed or modified while these functions might
be called.
.Pp
The implementations on most BSDs will try to initialize the program name
at program startup time, and
.Nm libbsd
will try to infer it from various known sources depending on the
target system.
But it is not a portable assumption that the program name will be set
without calling
.Fn setprogname ,
so portable programs should always call it after starting up.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr setproctitle 3bsd .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn setprogname
and
.Fn getprogname
functions first appeared in
.Nx 1.6 ,
.Fx 4.4 ,
.Dx 2.1
and
.Ox 5.4 .
